===========
Quick Start
===========

------------
cosmology.py
------------

You can find the file `cosmology.py` in the `examples` directory and it is as follows.

.. index:: single: cosmology.py
.. literalinclude:: ../examples/cosmology.par

To run a simulation you simply provide pkdgrav3 with a file with the appropriate parameter set.
The code is a Hybrid MPI/thread code so it is expected that you will run a single MPI process
per node (or per NUMA node), and the number of threads equal to the number of cores.

.. index:: single: SLURM

If you use the SLURM scheduler, then pkdgrav3 will automatically detect the configuration that
you requested via SLURM and configure itself appropriately. For example, if you have nodes with
16 cores, and you want to run on 10 nodes, then your SLURM script would be::

   #!/bin/bash -l
   #SBATCH --nodes=10
   #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1 --cpus-per-task=16 --ntasks-per-core=1
   srun pkdgrav3 cosmology.par

If you have a node with 128 cores and 8 NUMA nodes then you might prefer::

   #!/bin/bash -l
   #SBATCH --nodes=10
   #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=8 --cpus-per-task=16 --ntasks-per-core=1
   srun pkdgrav3 cosmology.par

Now let's talk about the parameters used in the example file.

Output Name
===========

.. index:: single: parameters ; achOutName

achOutName
   This parameter controls the filename part of output names. For example, if this is set to "sim1" then the output for step one will be "sim1.00001".

Cosmological Simulation
=======================

Periodic and Comoving
---------------------

.. index:: single: cosmology; enabling

To perform a cosmologic simulation (one with expansion), three additional
features must be enabled.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bComove

bComove = True
   Turns on comoving coordinates which allows the expansion to be accounted for.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bPeriodic

bPeriodic = True
   Enables periodic boundary conditions. This is also required when using the
   initial condition generator.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bEwald

bEwald = True
   Turns on Ewald force correction to account for the infinite extent of the Universe.

Accuracy
--------

.. index:: pair: accuracy; cosmology

You need to choose the timestepping scheme, as well as tune certain accuracy parameters

.. index:: single: parameters ; bEpsAccStep

bEpsAccStep = True
   This chooses the classic :math:`\epsilon / a` timestep criteria which is commonly used.

.. index:: single: parameters ; dTheta

dTheta = classic_theta_switch()
   Selects the dynamic :math:`\theta` switch which gives better accuracy for large scales
   at high redshift.

.. index:: single: parameters ; nReplicas

nReplicas = classic_replicas_switch()
   Switches the number of replicas between 2 and 1 depending on :math:`\theta`.

.. index:: pair: initial conditions; cosmology

Initial Conditions
==================

The example parameter file is setup to generate an initial condition.

Resolution
----------

.. index:: single: resolution

.. index:: single: parameters ; dBoxSize

dBoxSize
   The size of one side of the simulation volume (the length of the box) in :math:`h^{-1}` Mpc.

.. index:: single: parameters ; nGrid

nGrid
   The grid length. There will be :math:`nGrid^3` particles in the simulation.

These two parameters combined set the mass resolution of the simulation.

.. math::
   M_{\text{particle}} &= \frac{\text{dBoxSize}^3 \times \rho_c}{\text{nGrid}^3}\\
                       &= \frac{\text{dBoxSize}^3}{\text{nGrid}^3}\times 2.77536627208\times 10^{11}~h^{-1}M_\odot

Realization
-----------

.. index:: single: parameters ; b2LPT

b2LPT
   If this is true then second order perterbation theory will be used to generate the IC,
   otherwise only Zeldovich first order will be used.

.. index:: single: parameters ; iSeed

iSeed
   The random seed to use. A different seed gives a different random realization.

Start Redshift
--------------

.. index:: single: parameters ; dRedFrom

dRedFrom
   The starting redshift.

.. index:: single: cosmology

Cosmology
---------

To generate the initial condition you also need to specify the cosmology.
In this example we use an input file that contains a transfer function
generated by a Boltzmann code such as CLASS.

.. index:: single: parameters ; achTfFile

achTfFile
   The name of the file containing the tabulated transfer function.
   The first column is the wave number :math:`k` and the second column is 
   the transfer function :math:`T(k)`.

.. index:: single: parameters ; dSigma8

dSigma8
   The cosmological parameter :math:`\sigma_8` which is defined as the r.m.s. density
   variation when smoothed over a sphere of radius :math:`8 h^{-1}` Mpc using a
   tophat filter. This parameter is used to calculate :math:`A_s` which is used
   to normalize the power spectrum.

.. index:: single: parameters ; dSpectral

dSpectral
   The spectral index :math:`n_s` used to normalize the power spectrum.

.. index:: single: parameters ; h

h
   The dimensionless Hubble constant :math:`h`.

.. index:: single: parameters ; dOmega0

dOmega0
   The matter density of the Universe :math:`\Omega_m`.

.. index:: single: parameters ; dLambda

dLambda         = 0.68
   The energy density of the Universe :math:`\Omega_\Lambda`.

Simulation Duration
===================

.. index:: single: parameters ; iStartStep

iStartStep
   The starting step number. Simulations ordinarily start at step zero.

.. index:: single: parameters ; nSteps

nSteps
   The total number of steps. Outputs can only be produced at the end of each step,
   so this needs to be set at least as large as the number of outputs you want.
   The code will multistep (take smaller substeps) when the dynamics require it.

.. index:: single: parameters ; dRedTo

dRedTo
   What redshift to evolve the simulation to. Often zero (today) is appropriate.
   This parameter, combined with dRedFrom and nSteps sets :math:`\Delta T`.

Output and Logging
==================

.. index:: single: parameters ; iOutInterval

iOutInterval
   Indicates how frequently an output is written, in steps. A setting of 10 would
   write an output at step 10, 20, 30, and so on.

.. index:: single: parameters ; iCheckInterval

iCheckInterval
   Similar to ``iOutInterval``, this controls how often a checkpoint is written.
   Simulations can be restarted from a checkpoint without a loss of precision.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bDoDensity

bDoDensity = False
   Causes the SPH densities to be calculated and output as a text file whenever
   a regular output is performed.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bVDetails

bVDetails = True
   Enables additional progress infomation to be displayed as the simulation runs.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bOverwrite

bOverwrite
   If the code exits abnormally it leaves a special file behind. If this file 
   exists at startup, then the code exits. This flag disables this check.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bParaRead

bParaRead = True
   Read files in parallel. This is faster.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bParaWrite

bParaWrite = False
   Write files in parallel.

.. index:: single: parameters ; nParaRead

nParaRead
   To avoid overwhelming the file system, the number of simultanious readers can
   be limited by setting the parameter.

.. index:: single: parameters ; nParaWrite

nParaWrite
   This limits the number of simultanious writers during parallel write.

Memory and Performance
======================

.. index:: single: parameters ; bMemUnordered

bMemUnordered
   If false then particle IDs are not tracked. Particles are output in a
   random order and there is no way to track them between steps.
   This saves some memory.

.. index:: single: parameters ; bNewKDK

bNewKDK = True
   Switches to a new timestepping algorithm that does not require that accelerations
   be saved internally, instead velocity adjustments are applied directly as the forces
   are calculated. This saves memory.
